Ver.	Release Date	Description
----	------------	-----------
1.0	16/02/99	Initial Release
1.1	24/02/99	Added device selection parameter to command line
			Better track selection, NOTE: entering a single
			number will now only rip one track.
			Added track template, allows you to enter the
			desired format for the MP3 file
			Fixed problem when artist & album were the same
1.2	01/03/99	Fixed file ordering in the M3U file
			You can specify file names to use _ instead of
			spaces-
1.3	03/05/99	Fixed problems with invalid entries on CDDB
			using / in artist or album names
			Fixed problem with CDA which occassionally puts
			a > in the track listing causing ripit to croak
1.4	13/06/99	Multiple instances of ripit now supported using
			separate devices
			chars Truncated Album, Artist & Track titles to
			64 to avoid file name problems
			Fixed problem with strange chars in CDDB
1.5	01/08/99	Added support for LAME encoder
			Fixed logging problems with multiple instances
1.6	20/11/99	Added support for CDDA2WAV
			Added configure options for mp3 encoders and
			audio rippers
			Fixed a number of CDDB related problems
1.7	14/05/00	Added support for GOGO encoder
			Added support for TOSHA and CDDA rippers
			Fixed a minor CDDB problem
1.8	22/05/00	GOGO support was broken
			Testing options had been left in the encoder
			and ripper option variables
2.0	20/08/01	No longer uses XMCD
			Now uses perl CDDB_get for CDDB lookup
			Added support for DAGRAB
			Removed support for BLADEENC and GOGO
			Added support for OGGVORBIS
			Added support for ID3V2 tags
			Added genre override option
			Added more command line options
2.2	18/10/03	New maintainer (Mads Martin Joergensen
			<mmj@mmj.dk>)
			Trailing slash is no longer needed in the
			outputdir
			Use mkdir -p to create the output dir
			Use perl commands everywhere possible instead
			of the more expensive 'system()' call
			Create the m3u file in the output directory
			Other small fixes
2.4	06/01/04	Remove all usage of logfiles, people can
			redirect stdout and stderr. This removes
			insecure tmp file handling.
			Fix typo and adjust copyright info.
2.5	13/11/04	Changes by Felix Suwald:
			Fixed bug on eject command, fixed perl-typo on
			checking if genre is valid, was correct in older
			versions (NO linebreak in system-calls)...
2.6	15/11/04	New maintainer (Felix Suwald, ripit_at_suwald_com)
			Added printout of cddbid.
			Added option not to create the m3u-file.
			Added option to rip without cddb lookup.
			Added option to select track-ranges with
			hyphens, e.g. 1,6-9.
			Enhanced "no-parameter" ripping, e.g. a humble
			search for present CD and savings in home-dir.
2.6.1	18/11/04	Fixed bug on default genre.
2.6.2	19/11/04	Fixed bug on default trackname and template.
2.7	27/11/04	Fixed more bugs on default settings.
			Thanks to patches from Tuukka Pasanen
			(illuusio@lycos.com):
			Added option to lower case all names.
			Added template for oputputdir to make it
			themable like trackname.
			Added option to remove weird characters and use
			unicode for oggvorbis.
			Added better m3u handling.
2.8	03/12/04	Fixed more bugs on default settings, better
			search for number of tracks, diskid etc.
			Added option to submit CDDB entry at freedb.org.
2.9			Test (alpha) version of 3.0, not released.
3.0	18/12/04	Fixed "^M" (Control+M) Bug on CDDB retrieval.
			Added option to choose mirror host @ freedb.org.
			Added option to enter id3 genre name instead of
			genre number (e.g. enter "tri" for "Trip Hop").
			Added retrieval of disk category, genre and year
			using CDDB_get.pm version >= 2.22
			Added option to submit corrected CDDB entries,
			Revision-Number will be encreased by one!
			Fixed bug on output directory creation: will not
			be over written anymore.
			Added support for UTF-8 encoding using
			PROTOCOL-LEVEL 6 for CDDB retrieval.
3.0.1	18/12/04	Added support for genre in ogg vorbis files
			Fixed bug on non ID3v2 compliant genres when
			using oggenc, you now can submit them to the
			CDDB, even if you shouldn't, IMHO.
3.1	24/12/04	Added support for encoder Flac.
			Added option to save the CDDB file to the
			default ~/.cddb directory.
			Added option to edit CDDB disk and track
			comments; re-submission only if at least one
			entry is changed.
			Fixed bug on default output directory being
			root.
			Fixed bug on genre checking.
3.1.1	31/12/04	Fixed bug on genre checking.
			Fixed bug on CDDB submission of comment lines.
3.2	18/01/05	Was RipIT broken with Perl 5.8.5? It now works
			as with Perl 5.8.1.
			Added License definition: RipIT has GPL.
			Added option --interaction.
			Added option to choose $genre and $year in dir
			and tracktemplate!
			Added option to use vbr in lame. Type --bitrate
			new or --bitrate old instead of a number.
			Added several other options, one should not need
			to edit the source anymore.
3.3	16/02/05	Fixed bugs on output messages and questions.
			Fixed unfriendly options, don't use 0 or 1 for
			options without argument but with prefix "no".
			Fixed bug on too long lines for submission.
			Added option to use several encoders at the
			same run, e.g. --coder 2,0,1
			Added option --protocol to choose protocol level of
			CDDB query.
			Added option --proxy to use a proxy.
			Added option --mail for users mailaddress.
			Added option --nice to use nice for encoders.
			Added option --save to save a config file.
			Added option --help to display infos.
			Added option --dirtemplate, to use with '"..."'.
			Added option --tracktemplate, same as above.
			Added option --vbrmode to use lame in vbr mode
			with possibility to pass the -b and -B options.
3.3.1	17/02/05	Fixed serious bug: If last Track is a data
			track, RipIT gives up, but did so if last
			track is not a data track. Sorry for that.
3.3.2	19/02/05	Output looks nicer, now.
			Fixed bug on broken dagrab.
			Get error log when using cdparanoia and dagrab.
3.3.3	22/02/05	Fixed bugs on config file usage: Problem were
			parameters where argument can be zero!
			Improved handling of qualities.
3.3.4	23/02/05	Fixed bug on qualities when passed from command
			line vs. from config file and sorting when no
			encoder was defined.
3.3.5	03/03/05	Fixed bug on checking length of CDDB entries.
			Added option --utftag, use --noutftag if the tags
			shall be decoded to ISO8859-1.
3.3.6	18/04/05	Fixed another bug on checking length of CDDB
			entries. RipIT now distinguishes between tags and
			file-names to support (some) special characters in
			tags!
			Enhanced playlist file.
			Allow / in directory and track templates.
			Eject CD right after ripping.
3.3.7	23/04/05	Fixed bug on length of CD for CDDB submission
			and enhanced calculation of track lengths and
			CD-ID retrieval.
3.4	03/12/05	Added option --preset to enable the preset switch
			when using Lame.
			Added option --wav to keep wav files after ripping
			instead of deleting them.
			Added option --encode to be used as --noenocode if
			only wavs shall be done.
			Added option --sshlist to encode the wavs on
			different remote machines.
			Added option --local to prevent encoding of the
			wavs on the local machine with --nolocal.
			Added option --scp for secure-copy when using
			sshlist if fs can not be mounted on remote host(s).
			Added option --disable-paranoia to switch on the -Z
			option of cdparanoia when using cdparanoia.
			Added option --verbose to suppress any output. When
			errors occur, there still will be some interaction.
			Added options --lcd to use lcdproc, --lcdhost and
			--lcdport, all credits to <max.kaesbauer@gmail.com>
			Added support for faac, free advanced audio codec
			to create m4a (aac) files.
			Added options --cdopt and --faacopt, --flacopt,
			--lameopt, --oggopt.
			Added option --chars to prevent using special
			characters in file names with --nochars.
			Added option --comment to add a id3-comment to the
			tags.
			Added option --rip to be usead as --norip if the
			wavs are present and only encoding shall be done.
			Added option --infolog to log certain operations to
			a file; credits to M. Bright.
			Enhanced option --archive, the file will not only
			be saved, but one can read from ~/.cddb dir too.
			Enhanced options bitrate and quality: they can be
			switched "off" now!
			Fixed bug on --archive, the CDDB entry will be
			saved in full length and not partially deleted.
			Added option --savenew to creat a new config file
			with parameters passed to command line.
			Enhanced option --save, a backup config.old will
			be created and parameters passed on command line
			will be added to an existing config.file.
			Added option --config to prevent reading config
			file with --noconfig.
			Fixed bug on too long path (song) names (too long
			for cdparanoia and cdda2wav).
			Fixed bug on cdda2wav output. Was cdda2wav broken?
			Now cdda2wav should work again.
			Fixed bug on directory creation (wrong mkdir
			option for BSDers).
			Fixed bug on option --lowercase and --underscore,
			only the dirtemplate and tracktemplate will be
			modified, but not the --outputdir path.
			Fixed bug on --lowercase, it should work with all
			UTF-8 characters.
			Config file is now commented, instead of the
			options --save or --savenew one can edit manually
			~/ripit/config easily; credits to Cord Walter!
			RipIT prints a comment, if there might be a hidden
			track 0.
			Ripit tries to rip'n'code hidden tracks, if cdpara-
			noia is installed.
			Fixed bug on lamequality when several encoders are
			passed without lamequality.
			Fixed bug on playlist file, list should be sorted
			now and named after artist - album.
			Fixed bug on genre checking. If genre was partly
			lame compatible, either ripit hang up in an endless
			loop or lame failed because of wrong genre.
3.5.0	06/06/06	Thanks to Elimar Riesebieter Ripit got a Makefile,
			a manpage and is available as debian package.
			Added option --cdtoc to create a toc file to burn
			the wavs with cd-text using cdrdao or cdrecord
			(in dao mode).
			Added option --loop to ripp and encode several CDs
			without interruption (credits to S. Warten).
			Added options --normalize and --normopt to norma-
			lize the output level (credits to C. Walter).
			Fixed bug on CD device detection. Why did nobody
			complain about?
			Changed option --chars. Exclude special characters
			and  (ending!) periods in file names and paths, not
			in tags!
			Fixed some semi-bugs in comment tags for oggenc and
			flac.
			Major code cleaning after S. Warten introduced
			strict pragma.
3.5.1	16/06/06	Typo (everywhere oggenc) to satisfy the needs of
			Debian.
3.6.0	16/06/07	Fixed bug on special characters for tags during
			submission of CDDB entries.
			Fixed unpleasent behaviour if Lame is not
			installed.
			Fixed semi-bug on deletion of wavs using remote
			machines.
			Added option --merge to merge tracks for gapless
			encoding.
			Added option --resume to continue a previously
			started session.
			Added option --ghost to split tracks with gaps
			into chunks of sound (at experimental stage).
			Added options --prepend and --extend to enlarge
			chunks of sound when splitted with option --ghost.
			Added option --ejectcmd to specify command used
			to control ejection/loading of CD.
			Added option --ejectopt to specify options and
			arguments for --ejectcmd.
			Added optons --dpermission and --fpermission to
			set directory and file permissions.
			Added option --md5sum to create MD5-sum files for
			each type of sound files.
			Added option --nicerip to set niceness of ripping
			process.
			Added option --core to allow several encoding
			processes on each machine.
			Enhanced output from encoding process not to
			interfer with output of ripper.
			Submission of CDDB entries uses sendmail, not
			mail or nail.
			Some fine-tuning on detection of hidden-tracks
			and ghost-songs.
			Enhanced detection of perl modules needed,
			Ripit depends not on CDDB_get 2.22 but 2.25 and
			newer, please update.
3.7.0 06/05/09		Option --dirtemplate accepts more variables to
			automatically generate different
			output-directories when different encoding
			formats or the same format at different
			qualities is used: $suffix and $quality are self-
			explanatory, and $iletter is the initial-letter
			of the artist. Furthermore option dirtemplate is
			now an array, and for each encoder a different
			dirtemplate may be choosen.
			And of course, option --coder now accepts the
			same format more than once. See examples in
			manpage.
			Option ghost has been enhanced and will delete
			blank tracks -- very experimental.
			Options prepend and append accept values larger than
			zero at a decimal precision. RipIT will try to trim
			lead in/out if true silence (zero bytes) is
			encounterd.
			Fixed bug on corrupted wav headers when using
			option ghost. Flac should not fail anymore.
			Fixed bug on too long file names and paths for
			rippers, encoder should not wait endlessly.
			Fixed bug that option md5sum settings were not
			read in config file.
			Fixed bug on option loop, the CD tray should not
			close again when done and endlessly rip the same
			CD.
			Fixed bug on editing CDDB data when using option
			--lowercase. Tracktitles should not be discarded
			anymore.
			Fixed bug on directory creation. All newly
			created directories should get --dpermission.
			Option chars has slightly different default
			settings and argument possebilites, but behaves the
			same.
			Option --disable-paranoia now accepts numbers:
			0 is default (with paranoia mode on), 1 is
			paranoia off and 2 will switch paranoia off if
			a single track failed and retry the failed track
			once again without paranoia.
			Some code cleaning and structuring.
			Option core renamed to threads.
			I noticed that the CDDB_get.pm takes some time
			to abort CDDB retrieval if not connected to the
			internet; there is nothing I can do about for
			the moment.
			It should be possible to access CDDB servers
			freedb2.org and musicbrainz.org (using transfer
			mode http).
			Encoding of some weired DB files with non ascii
			characters solved. It still might give strange
			chars on older versions of Perl.
			Added option --normcmd to allow different calling
			sequences on other distros (like Debian).
			Added option --uppercasefirst to change each word
			of filenames and tags to first character in upper
			case.
3.8.0 28/09/09		Added support of mp4als (lossless) and Musepack
			(coder 4 and 5).
			Added option --musenc to set the command name of
			Musepack (e.g. mppenc or mpcenc).
			Added option --mb to access musicbrainz.org,
			discid calculation cmd or pm must be installed.
			Added option --execmd to execute a command when
			done.
			Added option --overwrite to force Ripit either
			to quit or overwrite an existing dierctory.
			Added option --quitnodb to quit ripping if no
			CDDB-entry was found.
			Added option --span to rip only parts of a track
			or the merged track-interval.
			Added option --book to rip all tracks into a single
			file and writing a chapter file when using faac.
			Added option --inf to create inf files to burn
			the wavs with CD-text in DAO mode with wodim.
			Added option --scsidevice if non ripping commands
			shall be executed on a different device node.
			Option --dirtemplate and --tracktemplate accept
			argument $trackno giving number of tracks of CD.
			Option --resume can be selected in the config.
			Option --loop has been enhanced, experimental
			value 2 will restart a new process as soon the
			previous disc finished with ripping.
			Fixed bug when listing merged tracks, there were
			more mergers shown than actually wanted and
			effectively ripped.
3.8.1. 28/11/09   	No new options added.
			Fixed bug in cd.toc file, corrupted oct encoding
			of some characters could appear.
			If a track contains a ghost song and two names
			separated by a shlash, ghost song will get that
			one without suffix and the track name shorten
			for the first (part of the) track.
			Added some timestamps in output.
			If MB is used, a genre (and year if not present)
			will be retrieved from freedb.org.
			If genre is not Lame compliant, genre "Other"
			will be used for Lame only, other encoders will
			used the supplied genre.
3.8.2. 28/12/09   	No new options added.
			Fixed bug in reading config file, encoding
			qualities were not read out.
			Updated Makefile, configfile will be backuped.
3.8.3. 03/04/10   	No new options added.
			Fixed bug on long file names in conjunction with
			normalize.
			Fixed bug when using relative paths.
3.9.0. 14/07/10		Added wavpack (coder 6) and ffmpeg (coder 7)
			support to encode to other (exotic) formats like
			apple lossless. Usage of ffmpeg might be exprimental.
			Added options --coverart and --coverpath to select
			and add coverart to the metadata. Note that
			coverart (pictures) must be supplied by the user.
			Added option --copycover to copy a cover from
			some place to each directory of encoded files.
			Added option --precmd to execute a command before
			ripping starts and e.g. ensure presence of coverart.
			Added option --trackoffset to add a constant
			value to the tracknumber in the tracktemplate.
			Added options --vatag and --vastring to detect
			various artist style and split artist and track
			title.
			Added option --mp3tags to add additional frames
			to mp3 files not supported by the encoder.
			Added option --cdcue to create cue-files
			(cue-sheets) to burn the (merged) wav.
			Added option --isrc to detect ISRCs in audio
			data using icedax.
			Added options --mblogin and --mbpass to submit
			detected ISRCs to MusciBrainz.
